ekadā dadhivimāthakāriṇīṃ mātaraṃ samupasedivān bhavān |
stanyalolupatayā nivārayannaṅkametya papivān payodharau ||1||
ekadā	once
dadhi-vimātha-kāriṇīṃ	the curd churning as she was
mātaraṃ	Thy mother
samupasedivān bhavān	approached Thou
stanya-lolupatayā	breast milk desiring
nivārayan-	obstructing (the churning)
aṅkam-etya	up (her) lap climbing
papivān payodharau	(Thou) sucked her breasts
Once when Thy mother was churning the curd, Thou approached her in the eagerness to be breast fed. Obstructing her churning Thou climbed up her lap and sucked at her breasts.
ardhapītakucakuḍmale tvayi snigdhahāsamadhurānanāmbuje |
dugdhamīśa dahane parisrutaṃ dhartumāśu jananī jagāma te ||2||
ardhapīta-	having half drunk
kucakuḍmale	the breasts lotus bud like
tvayi snigdha-hāsa-	(when) Thee with a charming smile
madhura-ānana-ambuje	on the sweet face, lotus like
dugdham-īśa	the milk, O Lord!
dahane parisrutaṃ	on the fire, having overflown
dhartum-āśu	to hold it, fast
jananī jagāma te	mother went away, Thy
O Lord! Thou had half-way sucked her lotus bud like breasts, with a charming smile playing on the sweet lotus like face. Just then, Thy mother went away in a haste to quickly hold the milk which had overflown on the fire.
sāmipītarasabhaṅgasaṅgatakrodhabhāraparibhūtacetasā|
manthadaṇḍamupagṛhya pāṭitaṃ hanta deva dadhibhājanaṃ tvayā ||3||
sāmi-pīta-	half drunk, (so)
rasa-bhaṅga-saṅgata-	the joy being interrupted, as a result
krodha-bhāra-	angered greatly
paribhūta-cetasā	with the mind overcome
mantha-daṇḍam-	the churning rod
upagṛhya pāṭitaṃ	taking up, was broken
hanta deva	Oh! O Lord!
dadhi-bhājanam tvayā	the curd pot by Thee
O Lord! Having drunk half way, and as a result the joy being interrupted, Thy mind was overcome with great rage. Oh! Then taking up the churning rod, the curd pot was broken by Thee.
uccaladdhvanitamuccakaistadā sanniśamya jananī samādrutā |
tvadyaśovisaravaddadarśa sā sadya eva dadhi vistṛtaṃ kṣitau ||4||
uccalat-dhvanitam-	by the loud sound
uccakai:-tadā	rising high then
sanniśamya	hearing
jananī samādrutā	Thy mother hastily came running
tvat-yaśa:-visara:-	Thy fame spreading
vat-dadarśa sā	as though, she saw
sadya eva dadhi	right then the curd
vistṛtaṃ kṣitau	spreading on the floor
Thy mother came running when she heard the loud sound rising of the pot being broken. Right then she saw the curd spreading on the floor,even like Thy pure unblemished fame spreading in the universe.
vedamārgaparimārgitaṃ ruṣā tvamavīkṣya parimārgayantyasau |
sandadarśa sukṛtinyulūkhale dīyamānanavanītamotave ||5||
vedamārga-parimārgitaṃ	through the path of the Vedas, sought after
ruṣā tvām-avīkṣya	the angered (Yashodaa), Thee not seeing
parimārgayantī-	searching (Thee)
asau sandadarśa	she saw
sukṛtinī-	the fortunate one (Yashodaa)
ulūkhale	(Thee) on the mortar
dīyamāna-navanītam-	giving butter
otave	to the cat
Thou who are sought after through the path of the Vedas, were not seen anywhere by Thy angered mother. She, the fortunate one searched everywhere and saw Thee sitting on the mortar feeding butter to the cat.
tvāṃ pragṛhya bata bhītibhāvanābhāsurānanasarojamāśu sā |
roṣarūṣitamukhī sakhīpuro bandhanāya raśanāmupādade ||6||
tvāṃ pragṛhya bata	Thee getting hold of, Oh!
bhīti-bhāvanā-	by the expression of fear
bhāsura-ānana-sarojam-	the shining face which was lotus like
āśu sā	hastily she
roṣa-rūṣita-mukhī	quivering with anger faced (she)
sakhī-pura:	in front of her friends
bandhanāya	to tie up Thee
raśanām-upādade	a rope took
Oh! Yashodaa with her face quivering due to anger, hastily caught hold of Thee whose lotus like face was looking very sweet with pretended fear. As her friends watched, she took a rope to tie Thee up.
bandhumicchati yameva sajjanastaṃ bhavantamayi bandhumicchatī |
sā niyujya raśanāguṇān bahūn dvyaṅgulonamakhilaṃ kilaikṣata ||7||
bandhum-icchati	as a friend,(who is) desired
yam-eva sajjana:-	him alone , good people
taṃ bhavantam-ayi	That Thee O Lord!
bandhum-icchatī	to tie desiring
sā niyujya	she using (tying together)
raśanā-guṇān bahūn	pieces of rope, many
dvyaṅgula-ūnam-	by two fingers (long), short
akhilaṃ	the whole length
kila-aikṣata	indeed found
All good men want to bind themselves to Thee alone in devotion. That Thou O Lord! Yashodaa desiring to tie, found the length of the rope short by two fingers, even though she attached many pieces of ropes to lengthen it.
vismitotsmitasakhījanekṣitāṃ svinnasannavapuṣaṃ nirīkṣya tām |
nityamuktavapurapyaho hare bandhameva kṛpayā'nvamanyathā: ||8||
vismit-utsmita-	wonderstruck and smiling
sakhījana-īkṣitāṃ	the friends (Gopis) watching
svinna-sanna-vapuṣaṃ	(she, with) perspiring and exhausted body
nirīkṣya tām	seeing her (Yashodaa)
nitya-mukta-vapu:-	forever free bodied
api-aho hare	though O Hari! (Thou)
bandham-eva	bondage alone
kṛpayā-anvamanyathā:	compassionately accepted
As Thy mother's friends were smilingly watching with wonder, Thou saw her body perspiring and exhausted due to the effort. O Hari! Thou who are the ever-free Being, out of compassion accepted the bondage.
sthīyatāṃ ciramulūkhale khaletyāgatā bhavanameva sā yadā|
prāgulūkhalabilāntare tadā sarpirarpitamadannavāsthithā: ||9||
sthīyatāṃ	(may you) stay here
ciram-ulūkhale	for long at the mortar
khala-iti-	O rouge, thus (saying)
āgatā bhavanam-eva	(when she) returned to the house only
sā yadā prāk-	she when, earlier
ulūkhala-bilāntare	in the mortar's cavity
tadā sarpi:-arpitam-	then, the butter which was placed
adan-avāsthithā:	eating Thou stayed
As Yashodaa went back into the house, she said 'O Rogue! stay tied like this to the mortar for long.' Thou stayed there eating the butter which Thou had earlier placed in the cavity of the mortar.
yadyapāśasugamo vibho bhavān saṃyata: kimu sapāśayā'nayā |
evamādi divijairabhiṣṭuto vātanātha paripāhi māṃ gadāt ||10||
yadi-apāśa-sugama:	if (Thou are) to the desire less easily attainable
vibho bhavān	O All pervading Being! Thou
saṃyata: kimu	were tied down, how come
sapāśayā-anayā	(who was) having a rope, by her (Yashodaa)
evam-ādi	thus and so forth
divijai:-abhiṣṭuta:	by the gods in heaven praised
vātanātha	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
paripāhi māṃ gadāt	save me from my ailments.
O All Pervading Being! If Thou are easily attainable to the desire less (a-paash) people, who are not bound by desire, how was it that Yashodaa was able to secure Thee with a (paash) rope for binding. Thou whose glories were thus sung by the gods in the heaven, O Lord of Guruvaayur! May Thou save me from my ailments.